= Server Side Processing Functions
:Leonard Porrello <lporrel@gmail.com>:
{docdate}
:numbered:
:toc:

== Server Functions, Invocation, and Composition

To run a server function, you call the function with its arguments in
the 'query string' part of a URL. The server function call is a kind of
DAP Constraint Expression. Here are some examples:

Get the U and V components of the fnoc1 dataset, but apply the
dataset's scale_factor attribute (the 'm' in y=mx+b; for these
variables, 'b' is zero). Compare the values returned by the
linear_scale() server function to those returned by accessing the
variables without using the function

.Normal accees versus Using a server function
====
// Normal access retrieves the values of two variables
http://test.opendap.org/dap/data/nc/fnoc1.nc.ascii?u,v

// However, using a server function, the values can be scaled
http://test.opendap.org/dap/data/nc/fnoc1.nc.ascii?linear_scale(u),linear_scale(v)
====

=== Function Composition

Server-side functions provide a way to access the processing power of
the data server and perform operations that fall outside the scope of
the DAP constraint mechanism of projection and selection. Each server
can load functions at run-time, so the set of functions supported may be
different than those documented here. Use the _version()_ function to
get a list of functions supported by a particular server. To get
information about a particular function, call that function with no
arguments. The 'help' response from both _version()_ and a function such
as _linear_scale()_ is a simple XML document listing the function's
name, version and URL to more complete documentation.

All the functions listed here are included in the Hyrax server, versions 1.6 and
later. Other servers may also support these.

All of these functions can be composed. Thus, the values from the
geogrid() function can be used by the linear_scale() function. Here's an
example:

.Functional Composition: The output of one function and serve as input to another
====
 linear_scale(geogrid(SST, 45, -82, 40, -78)) // spaces added for clarity
====

This first subsets the variable _SST_, so only those values in latitude
45 to 40 and longitude -82 to -78 are returned; it then passes those
values to the linear_scale() function, which will scale them and return
those new values to the caller.

== Server Functions in the _BES functions_ Module

For Hyrax 1.9, the server functions listed here were moved from libdap,
where they were 'hard coded' into the constraint evaluator to a module
that is loaded like the other BES modules. Currently, this 'functions'
module is part of the BES source code while we decide where it should
reside. Also note that __make_array()__, the _#Type_ special form,
_bind_name()_ and _bind_shape()_ are new functions designed to pass
large arrays filled with constant values into custom server functions.
We will expand on these as part of an NSF-sponsored project in the
coming two years.

[[SSF_geogrid]]
=== geogrid()

==== Version Documented: 1.2

The geogrid() function applies a constraint given in latitude and
longitude to a DAP Grid variable. The arguments to the function are...

.There are two ways to call *geogrid()*
----
geogrid(grid variable, top, left, bottom, right[, expression ...])
geogrid(grid variable, latitude map, longitude map, top, left, bottom, right[, expression ...])
----

The _grid variable_ is the data to be sub-sampled and must be a Grid.
The optional latitude and longitude maps must be Maps in the named Grid
and specifying these overrides the _geogrid_ heuristics for choosing the
lat/lon maps. The Top, left, bottom, right are the latitude and
longitude coordinates of the northwesterm and southeastern corners of
the selection box. The expressions consist of one or more quoted
relational expressions. See grid() for more information about the
expressions.

The function will always return a single Grid variable whose values
completely cover the given region, although there may be cases when some
additional data are also returned. If the longitude values 'wrap around'
the right edge of the data, the function will make two requests and
return those joined together as a single Grid. If the data are stored
with the southern latitudes at the top of the array, the return result
will be flipped so that the northern latitudes are at the top. If the
Longitude values are offset, the function will correct for that as
well.

'''''

==== Version Documented: 1.1

The geogrid() function applies a constraint given in latitude and
longitude to a DAP Grid variable. The arguments to the function are:

----
 geogrid(variable, top, left, bottom, right[, expression ...])
----

The _variable_ is the data to be sub-sampled. The Top, left, bottom,
right are the latitude and longitude coordinates of the northwesterm and
southeastern corners of the selection box. The expressions consist of
one or more quoted relational expressions. See grid() for more
information about the expressions.

The function will always return a single Grid variable whose values
completely cover the given region, although there may be cases when some
additional data are also returned. If the longitude values 'wrap around'
the right edge of the data, then the function will make two requests and
return those joined together as a single Grid. If the data are stored
with the southern latitudes at the top of the array, the return result
will be flipped so that the northern latitudes are at the top.

[[SSF_grid]]
=== grid

==== Version Documented: 1.0

The grid() function takes a DAP Grid variable and zero or more
relational expressions. Each relational expression is applied to the
grid using the server's constraint evaluator and the resulting grid is
returned. The expressions may use constants and the grid's map vectors
but may not use any other variables. In particular, you cannot use the
grid values themselves

Two forms of expression are provided:

. `var relop const`
. `const relop var relop const`

Where _relop_ stands for one of the relational operators, such as `=` 
`>`, or `<`

For example: `grid(sst,"20>TIME>=10")` and `grid(sst,"20>TIME","TIME>=10")`
are both legal and, in this case, also equivalent.

[[SSF_linear_scale]]
=== linear_scale

==== Version Documented: 1.0b1

The linear_scale() function applies the familiar y = mx + b equation to
data. It has three forms:

.There are three ways to call *linear_scale()*
----
linear_scale(var)
linear_scale(var,scale_factor,add_offset)
linear_scale(var,scale_factor,add_offset,missing_value)
----

If only the name of a variable is given, the function looks for the
COARDS/CF-1.0 __scale_factor__, _add_offset_ and _missing_value_
attributes. In the equation, 'm' is scale_factor, 'b' is add_offset and
data values that match missing_value are not scaled.

If add_offset cannot be found, it defaults to zero; if missing_value
cannot be found, the test for it is not performed.

In the second and third form, if the given values conflict with the
dataset's attributes, the given values override.

=== The make_array() Function

The _make_array()_ function takes three or more arguments and returns a
DAP2 Array with the values passed to the function.

make_array(<__type__>, <__shape__>, <__values__>, ...)::
  <__type__> is any of the DAP2 numeric types (Byte, Int16, UInt16,
  Int32, UInt32, Float32, Float64); <__shape__> is a string that
  indicates the size and number of the array's dimensions. Following
  those two arguments are N arguments that are the values of the array.
  The number of values must equal the product of the dimension sizes.

Example: make_array(Byte,"[4][4]",2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5) will
return a DAP2 four by four Array of Bytes with the values 2, 3, ... .
The Array will be named _g<int>_ where <int> is 1, 2, ..., such that the
name does not conflict with any existing variable in the dataset. Use
_bind_name()_ to change the name.

This function can build an array with 1024 X 1024 Int32 elements in
about 4 seconds.

=== The 'make array' Special Forms

These special forms can build vectors with specific values and return
them as DAP2 Arrays. The Array variables can be named using the
_bind_name()_ function and have their shape set using __bind_shape()__.

$<type>(__size hint__,: __values__, ...)::
  The _$<type>_ (__$Byte__, __$Int32__, ...) literal starts the special
  form. The first argument _size hint_ provides a way to preallocate the
  memory needed to hold the vector of values. Following that, the values
  are listed. Unlike __make_array()__, it is not necessary to provide
  the exact size of the vector; the size hint is just that, a hint. If a
  size hint of zero is supplied, it will be ignored. Any of the DAP2
  numeric types can be used with this special form. This is called a
  'special form' because it invokes a custom parser that can process
  values very efficiently.

Example: $Byte(16:2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5) will return a one
dimensional (i.e., a vector) Array of Bytes with values 2, 3, ... . The
vector is named _g<int>_ just like the array returned by make_array().
The vector can be turned in to a N-dimensional Array using
_bind_shape()_ using
_bind_shape("[4][4]",$Byte(16:2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5))._

The special forms can make a 1,047,572 element vector on Int32 in 0.4
seconds, including the time required to parse the million plus values.

==== Performance Measurements

Time to make 1,000,000 (actually 1,048,576) element Int32 array using
the special form, where the argument vector<int> was preset to 1,048,576
elements. Times are for 50 repeats.

Summary: Using the special for $Int32(size_hint, values...) is about 10
times faster for a 1 million element vector than
make_array(Int32,[1048576],values...). As part of the performance
testing, the scanner and parser were run under a sampling runtime
analyzer ('Instruments' on OS/X) and the code was optimized so that long
sequences of numbers would scan and parse more efficiently. This
benefits both the make_array() function and $type() special form.

==== Raw Timing Data

In all cases, a 1,048,576 element vector of Int32 was built 50 times.
The values were serialized and written to /dev/null using the command
_time besstandalone -c bes.conf -i bescmd/fast_array_test_3.dods.bescmd
-r 50 > /dev/null_ where the _.bescmd_ file lists a massive constraint
expression (a million values). The same values were used.

NB: The DAP2 consraint expression scanner was improved based on info
from 'instruments', an OS/X profiling tool. Copying values and applying
www2id escaping was moved from the scanner, where it was applied it to
every token that matched SCAN_WORD, to the parser, where it was used
only for non-numeric tokens. This performance tweak makes a big
difference in this case since there are a million SCAN_WORD tokens that
are not symbols.

Runtimes for make_array() and $type, scanner/parser optimized, two
trials

.Using the make_array function is almost twelve times slower than the builtin operator
[cols="4*^,options=header"]
|===
|      3+| Time in Seconds

| What | Real (s) | User | System

| $type, with hint | 19.844 | 19.355 | 0.437

| $type, with hint | 19.817 | 19.369 | 0.427

| $type, no hint | 19.912 | 19.444 | 0.430

| $type, no hint | 19.988 | 19.444 | 0.428

| make_array() | 195.332 | 189.271 | 6.058

| make_array() | 197.900 | 191.628 | 6.254
|===

=== bind_name() and bind_shape()

These functions take a BaseType* object and bind a name or shape to it
(in the latter case the BaseType* must be an Array*). They are intended
to be used with _make_array()_ and the _$type_ special forms, but they
can be used with any variable in a dataset.

bind_name(__name__,__variable__)::
  The _name_ must not exist in the dataset; _variable_ may be the name
  of a variable in the dataset (so this function can rename an existing
  variable) or it can be a variable returned by another function or
  special form.
bind_shape(__shape expression__,__variable__)::
  The _shape expression_ is a string that gives the number and size of
  the array's dimensions; the _variable_ may be the name of a variable
  in the dataset (so this function can rename an existing variable) or
  it can be a variable returned by another function or special form.

Here's an example showing how to combine __bind_name__, _bind_shape_ and
_$Byte_ to build an array of constants:
__bind_shape("[4][4]",bind_name("bob",$Byte(0:2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5,2,3,4,5)))__.
The result, in a browser, is:

---- 
Dataset: function_result_coads_climatology.nc
bob[0], 2, 3, 4, 5
bob[1], 2, 3, 4, 5
bob[2], 2, 3, 4, 5
bob[3], 2, 3, 4, 5
----

=== Unstructured Grid Subsetting

The *ugr5()* function subsets an Unstructured Grid (aka flexible mesh)
if it conforms to the
https://github.com/ugrid-conventions/ugrid-conventions/blob/master/ugrid-conventions.md[Ugrid
Conventions] built around netCDf and CF. More information on subsetting
files that conform to this convention can be found
https://github.com/ugrid-conventions/ugrid-conventions/blob/master/ugrid-subsetting.md[here].

See ../index.php/OPULS:_UGrid_Subsetting[ugr5 documentation] for more
information.

This function is optional with Hyrax and is provided by the
ugrid_functions module.

[[SSF_version]]
=== version()

The _version_ function provides a list of the server-side processing
functions available on a given server along with their versions. For
information on a specific function, call it with no arguments or look at
this page.

=== tabular()

Brief: Transform one or more arrays to a sequence.

This function will transform one or more arrays into a sequence, where
each array becomes a column in the sequence, with one exception. If each
array has the same shape, then the number of columns in the resulting
table is the same as the number of arrays. If one or more arrays has
more dimensions than the others, an extra column is added for each of
those extra dimensions. Arrays are enumerated in row-major order (the
right-most dimension varies fastest).

It's assumed that for each of the arrays, elements (i0, i1, ..., in) are
all related. However, the function makes no test to ensure that.

Note: While this version of tabular() will work when some arrays have
more dimensions than others, the collection of arrays must have shapes
that 'fit together'. This is case the arrays are limited in two ways.
First the function is limited to _N_ and _N+1_ dimension arrays, nothing
else, regardless of the value of __N__. Second, the arrays with _N+1_
dimensions must all share the same named dimension for the 'additional
dimension' and that named shred dimension will appear in the output
Sequence as a new column.

tabular(__array1__, __array2__, ..., __arrayN__) ::
  Returns a Sequence with N or N+1 columns

=== roi()

Brief: Subset N arrays using index slicing information

This function should be called with a series of array variables, each of
which are N-dimensions or greater, where the N common dimensions should
all be the same size. The intent of this function is that a
N-dimensional bounding box, provided in indicial space, will be used to
subset each of the arrays. There are other functions that can be used to
build these bounding boxes using values of dataset variables - see
bbox() and bbox_union(). Taken together, the roi(), bbox() and
bbox_union() functions can be used to subset a collection of Arrays
where some arrays are taken to be dependent variables and others
independent variables. The result is a subset of 'discrete coverage' the
collection of independent and dependent variables define.

roi(__array1__, __array2__, ..., __arrayN__, bbox(...)) +
roi(__array1__, __array2__, ..., __arrayN__, bbox_union(bbox(...),
bbox(...), ..., "union")) ::
  Subset __array1__, ..., using the bound box given as the last
  argument. The assumption is that the arrays will be the range
  variables of a coverage and that the bounding boxes will be computed
  using the range variables. See the _bbox()_ and _bbox_union()_
  function descriptions.

=== bbox()

Brief: Return the bounding box for an array

Given an N-dimensional Array of simple numeric types and two minimum and
maximum values, return the indices of a N-dimensional bounding box. The
indices are returned using an Array of Structure, where each element of
the array holds the name, start index and stop index in fields with
those names.

It is up to the caller to make use of the returned values; the array is
not modified in any way other than to read in it's values (and set the
variable's read_p property).

The returned Structure Array has the same name as the variable it
applies to, so that error messages can reference the source variable.

bbox(__array__, __min-value__, __max-value__) ::
  Given that _array_ is an N-dimensional array, return a DAP Array with
  N elements. Each element is a DAP Structure with two fields, the
  indices corresponding to the first and last occurrence of the values
  _min-value_ and __max-value__.

=== bbox_union()

Brief: Combine several bounding boxes, forming their union.

This combines N BBox variables (Array of Structure) forming either their
union or intersection, depending on the last parameter's value ("union"
or "inter[section]").

If the function is passed bboxes that have no intersection, an exception
is thrown. This is so that callers will know why no data were returned.
Otherwise, an empty response, while correct, could be baffling to the
caller.

bbox_union(bbox(__a1__, __min-value-1__, __max-value-1__), bbox(__a2__,
__min-2__, __max-2__), ..., "union"|"intersection") ::
  Given 1 or more bounding box Array of Structures (as returned by the
  _bbox()_ function) form their union or intersection and return that
  bounding box (using the same Array of Structures representation).

== Functions Included _FreeForm Module_

There are a number of date and time functions supported by the FreeForm
server.

//@TODO Add documentation for the functions

=== Projection Functions

=== Selection Functions
