= CSV Handler
:Leonard Porrello <lporrel@gmail.com>:
{docdate}
:numbered:
:toc:

== Introduction

This handler will serve Comma-Separated Values type data. Form many
kinds of files, only very modifications to the data files are needed. If
you have very complex ASCII data (e.g., data with headers), take a look
at the FreeForm handler, too.

=== Data File Configuration

Given a simple CSV data file, such as would be written out by Excel, add
a single line at the start that provides a name and OpenDAP datatype for
each column. Just as the data values in a given row are separated by a
comma, so are the column names and types. Here is a small example data
file with the added _name<type>_ configuration row.

"Station<String>","latitude<Float32>","longitude<Float32>","temperature_K<Float32>","Notes<String>"

"CMWM",-34.7,23.7,264.3,

"BWWJ",-34.2,21.5,262.1,"Foo"

"CWQK",-32.7,22.3,268.4,

"CRLM",-33.8,22.1,270.2,"Blah"

"FOOB",-32.9,23.4,269.69,"FOOBAR"

==== Supported OpenDAP Datatypes

The CSV handler supports the following DAP2 simple types: Int16, Int32,
Float32, Float64, String.

==== Dataset representation

The CSV handler will return represent the columns in the dataset as
arrays with the named dimension __record__. For example, the sample data
shown above will be represented in DAP2 by this handler as:

----
Dataset {
    String Station[record = 5];
    Float32 latitude[record = 5];
    Float32 longitude[record = 5];
    Float32 temperature_K[record = 5];
    String Notes[record = 5];
} temperature.csv;
----

This is in contrast to the FreeForm handler that would represent these
data as a Sequence with five columns.

For each column, the corresponding Array in the OpenDAP dataset has one
attribute named _type_ with a string value of __Int16__, ...,
__String__. However, see below for information on how to add custom
attributes to a dataset.

=== Known Problems

There are no known problems.

=== Configuration Parameters

=== Configuring the Handler

This handler has no specific configuration parameters.

=== Configuring Datasets

There are two ways to add custom attributes to a dataset. First, you can
use an _ancillary attribute_ file in the same directory as the dataset.
Alternatively, you can use NcML to add new attributes, variables, etc.
See <<NcML_Module, the NcML Handler documentation>> for more information 
on that option. Here we will describe how to set up an ancillary attribute file.

==== Simple Attribute Definitions

For any OpenDAP dataset, it is possible to write an ancillary attributes
file like the following. If that file has the name __dataset__.`das`
then whenever Hyrax reads __dataset__, it will also read those
attributes, and return them when asked.

----
Attributes {
   Station {
      String bouy_type "flashing";
      Byte Age 53;
   }
   Global {
       String DateCompiled "11/17/98";
       String Conventions "CF-1.0", "CF-1.6";
   }
}
----

The format of this file is very simple: Each variable in the dataset may
have a collection of attributes, each of which consists of a type, a
name and one or more values. In the above example, the variable
_Station_ will have the additional attributes _bouy_type_ and _Age_ with
the respective types and values. Note that datasets may also define
global attributes - information about the dataset as a whole - by adding
a section with a name that doesn't match the name of any variable in the
dataset. In this example, I used _Global_ for this (because it's
obvious) but I could have used __foo__. Also note the attribute
_Conventions_ has two values, _CF-1.0_ and _CF-1.6_

