= The NetCDF Handler
:Leonard Porrello <lporrel@gmail.com>:
{docdate}
:numbered:
:toc:

== Introduction

There are several versions of the netCDF software for reading and
writing data and using those different versions, it's possible to make
several different kinds of data files. For the most part, netCDF strives
to maintain compatibility so that any older file can be read using any
newer version of the library. To ensure that the netCDF handler can read
(almost) any valid netCDF data file, you should make sure to use the
latest version of the netCDF library when you build or install the
handler.

However, as of netCDF 4, there are some new data model components in
netCDF that are hard to represent in DAP2 (hence the 'almost' in the
preceding paragraph). If the handler, as of version 3.10.x, is linked
with netCDF 4.1.x or later, you will be able to read any netCDF file
that fits the 'classic' model of netCDF (as defined by
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/docs/netcdf/Which-Format.html#Which-Format[Unidata's
documentation]) which essentially means any file that uses only data
types present in the netCDF 3.x API but with the addition that these
files can employ both internal compression and chunking.

The new data types present in the netCDF data model present more of a
challenge. However, as of version 3.10.x, the Hyrax data handler will
serve most of the new cardinal types and the more commonly used 'user
defined types'.

=== Mappings Between NetCDF Version 4 Data Model and DAP2 Data Types

All of the cardinal types in the netCDF 4 data model map directly to
types in DAP2 except for the following:

NC_BYTE::
  There is no 'signed byte' type in DAP2 so these map to an unsigned
  byte or signed Int16, depending on the value of the option
  NC.PromoteByteToShort (see below where the configuration parameters
  are described).
NC_CHAR::
  There is no 'character' type in DAP2 so these map to DAP Strings of
  length one. Arrays of _N_ characters in netCDF map to arrays of _N-1_
  Strings in DAP
NC_INT64, NC_UINT64::
  DAP2 does not support 64-bit integers (this will be added soon to the
  next version of the protocol).

==== Mappings for netCDF 4's User Defined types

In the netCDF documentation, types such as Compound (which is
effectively C's _struct_ type), et c., are called _User Defined_ types.
Unlike the cardinal types, netCDF 4'S user defined types don't always
have a simple mapping to DAP2's types. However, the most important of
the user defined types, NC_COMPOUND, does map directly to DAP2's
Structure. Here's how the user defined types are mapped by the handler
as of version 3.10:

NC_COMPOUND::
  This maps directly to a DAP2 Structure. The handler works with both
  compound variables and attributes. For attributes, the handler only
  recognizes scalar and vector (one-dimensional) compounds. For
  variables scalar and array compounds are supported including compounds
  within compounds and compounds with fields that are arrays.
NC_VLEN::
  Not supported
NC_ENUM::
  Supported so long as the 'base type' is not a 64-bit integer. We add
  extra attributes to help the downstream user. We add
  _DAP2_OriginalNetCDFBaseType_ with the value _NC_ENUM_ and
  _DAP2_OriginalNetCDFTypeName_ with the name of the type from the file
  (Enums in netCDF are user-defined types, so they have names set y the
  folks who wrote the file). We also add two attributes that provide
  information about the integral values and they names (e.g., Clear = 0,
  Cumulonimbus = 1, Stratus = 2, ..., Missing = 255) using two
  attributes: _DAP2_EnumValues_ and __DAP2_EnumNames__.
NC_OPAQUE::
  This type is mapped to an array of Bytes (so the scalar NC_OPAQUE
  becomes a one-dimensional array in DAP2). If a netCDf file contains an
  array (with _M_ dimensions) of NC_OPAQUE vars, then the DAP response
  will contain a Byte array with _M+1_ dimensions. In addition, the
  handler adds an attribute _DAP2_OriginalNetCDFBaseType_ with the value
  _NC_OPAQUE_ and _DAP2_OriginalNetCDFTypeName_ with the name of the
  type from the file to the Byte variable so that savvy clients can see
  what's going on. Even though the DAP2 object for an NC_OPAQUE is an
  array, it cannot be subset (but arrays of NC_OPAQUEs can be subset
  with the restriction that _M+1_ dimensional DAP2 Byte array can only
  be subset in the original NC_OPAQUE's _M_ dimensions).

==== NetCDF 4's Group

The netCDF handler currently reads only from the root group.

=== Configuration parameters

==== IgnoreUnknownTypes

When the handler reads a type that it does not recognize, it will
normally signal an error and stop processing. Setting this parameter to
true will cause it to silently ignore the unknown type (an error message
may be written to the bes log file).

Accepted values: true,yes|false,no, defaults to false.

Example:

----
NC.IgnoreUnknownTypes=true
----

==== ShowSharedDimensions

Include shared dimensions as separate variables. This feature is
included to support older clients based on the netCDF library. Some
versions of the library depend on the shared dimensions appearing as
variables at the 'top' of the file.

Clients that announce to the server that they understand newer versions
of the DAP (3.2 and up) won't need these extra variables, while older
ones likely will. In the 3.10.0 version of the handler, the DAP version
that clients announce they can accept will determine how the handler
responses _unless_ this parameter is set, in which case, the value set
in the configuration file will override that default behavior.

Accepted values: true,yes|false,no, defaults to false.

Example:

----
NC.ShowSharedDimensions=false
----

==== PromoteByteToShort

This option first appears in Hyrax 1.8; version 3.10.0 of the
netcdf_handler.

**Note**: Hyrax version 1.8 ships with this turned on in the netcdf
handler's configuration file, even though the default for the option is
__off__.

Use this option to promote DAP2 _Byte_ variables and attributes to
__Int16__, noting that Byte is unsigned and Int16 is signed, so this is
a way to preserve the sign of netCDF's _signed Byte_ data type.

For netcdf4 files, this option behaves the same except that NC_OPAQUE
variables are externalized as DAP Bytes regardless of the option's
value; their Byte attributes, on the other hand, as promoted to Int16
when the option is __true__.

Backstory: In NetCDF the _Byte_ data type is signed while in DAP2 it is
unsigned. For data (i.e., variables) this often makes no real difference
because byte data are often read from the network and dumped into an
array where their sign is interpreted (correctly or not) by the client
software - in other words byte-data is often a special case. However,
this is, strictly speaking, wrong. In addition, and maybe more
importantly, with attributes the values are interpreted by the server
and represented in ASCII (and sent to the client as text), so the sign
is interpreted by the server and and the resulting text is converted
into a binary value by the client; the simple trick of letting the
default C types handle the value's sign won't work. One way around this
incompatibility is to promote _Byte_ in DAP2 to __Int16__, which is a
signed type.

----
Accepted values: true,yes|false,no, defaults to false, the server's original behavior.
----

Example:

----
NC.PromoteByteToShort=true
----

=== NetCDF to DAP Type Mappings

. _The complete set of mappings for the types in the netCDF 4 data
model +
_ (entries in gray are new types not currently supported; entries in
green are new types that are supported)
[width="100%",cols="20%,20%,20%,20%,20%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|netCDF type name |netCDF type description |DAP2 type name |DAP2 type
description |Notes
|NC_BYTE |8-bit signed integer |dods_byte +
_dods_int16_ (see note) |8-bit unsigned integer +
_16-bit signed int_ (see note) |The DAP2 type is unsigned; This mapping
can be changed so that netcdf Byte mapps to DAP2 Int16 (which will
preserve the netCDF Byte's sign bit (see the NC.PromoteByteToShort
configuration parameter).

|NC_UBYTE |8-bit unsigned integer |dods_byte |8-bit unsigned integer |

|NC_CHAR |8-bit unsigned integer |dods_str |variable length character
string |Treated as character data; arrays are treated specially (see
text)

|NC_SHORT |16-bit signed integer |dods_int16 |16-bit signed integer |

|NC_USHORT |16-bit unsigned integer |dods_uint16 |16-bit unsigned
integer |

|NC_INT |32-bit signed integer |dods_int32 |32-bit signed integer |

|NC_UINT |32-bit unsigned integer |dods_uint32 |32-bit unsigned integer
|

|NC_INT64 |64-bit signed integer |None | |Not supported

|NC_UINT64 |64-bit unsigned integer |None | |Not supported

|NC_FLOAT |32-bit floating point |dods_float32 |32-bit floating point |

|NC_DOUBLE |64-bit floating point |dods_float64 |64-bit floating point |

|NC_STRING |variable length character string |dods_str |variable length
character string |In DAP2 it's impossible to distinguish this from an
array of NC_CHAR

|NC_COMPOUND |A user defined type similar to C's struct |dods_structure
|A DAP Structure; similar to C's struct |

|NC_OPAQUE |A BLOB data type |dods_byte |an array of bytes a|
The handler adds two attributes (__DAP2_OriginalNetCDFBaseType__ with
the value NC_OPAQUE +

and _DAP2_OriginalNetCDFTypeName_ with the type's name) that provide
info for savvy clients; +
 see text above about subsetting details

|NC_ENUM |Similar to C's enum |dods_byte, ..., dods_uint32 |any integral
type a|
The handler chooses an integral type depending on the type used in the
NetCDF file. +

It adds the _DAP2_OriginalNetCDFBaseType_ and
_DAP2_OriginalNetCDFTypeName_ attributes +
 as with NC_OPAQUE and also _DAP2_EnumNames_ and __DAP2_EnumValues__.
Enums with 64-bit +
 integer base types are not supported.

|NC_VLEN |variable length arrays |None | |
|=======================================================================
